





{{Infobox person
| name               = Beyoncé
| image              = Beyoncé at The Lion King European Premiere 2019.png
| caption            = Beyoncé at The Lion King premiere in 2019
| birth_name         = Beyonce Giselle Knowles
| birth_date         = 
| birth_place        = Houston, Texas, U.S.
| other_names        = 
| occupation         = 
| works              = 
| organization       = {{
* Parkwood Entertainment
* Ivy Park
}}
| years_active       = 1997–present
| spouse             = 
| children           = 3, including  Blue Ivy
| father             = Mathew Knowles
| mother             = Tina Lawson
| relatives          = {{
* Solange Knowles (sister)
* Angela Beyincé (cousin)
}}
| awards             = Full list
| module             = {{Infobox musical artist
| embed           = yes
| genre           = {{
* Contemporary R&R&B
* pop
* hip hop
* dance
}}
| instrument      = Vocals
| label           = {{
* Parkwood
* Columbia
* Music World
}}
| current_member_of = The Carters
| past_member_of  = Destiny's Child

| website         = 
}}
| signature          = 
}}

Beyoncé Giselle Knowles-Carter (</ref>

Beyoncé performed in various singing and dancing competitions as a child. She rose to fame in the late 1990s as a member of the R&B girl group Destiny's Child, one of the List of best-best-selling girl groups of all time. Their hiatus saw the release of her debut album Dangerously in Love (2003), which featured the US Billboard Hot 100 number-one singles "Crazy in Love" and "Baby Boy". Following the 2006 disbanding of Destiny's Child, Beyoncé released her second solo album, B'B'Day, which contained singles "Irreplaceable" and "Beautiful Liar". Beyoncé also starred in multiple films such as Austin Powers in Goldmember (2002), The Pink Panther (2006), Dreamgirls (2006), Obsessed (2009), and The Lion King (2019). Her marriage to Jay-Z and her portrayal of Etta James in Cadillac Records (2008) influenced her third album, I Am... Sasha Fierce (2008), which earned a record-setting six Grammy Awards in 2010. It spawned the successful singles "If I Were a Boy", "Single Ladies", and "Halo". After professionally splitting from her manager and father Mathew Knowles in 2010, she released her musically diverse fourth album 4 in 2011.

Beyoncé later achieved critical acclaim for her sonically experimental visual albums, Beyoncé (2013) and Lemonade (2016), the latter of which was the world's best-selling album of 2016 and the most acclaimed album of her career, exploring themes of infidelity, feminism, and womanism. In 2018, she released Everything Is Love, a collaborative album with her husband, Jay-Z, as the Carters. As a featured artist, Beyoncé topped the Billboard Hot 100 with the remixes of "Perfect" by Ed Sheeran in 2017 and "Savage" by Megan Thee Stallion in 2020. The same year, she released the musical film Black Is King with an accompanying visual album, with praise from critics. In 2022, Beyoncé received further critical acclaim for her seventh studio album Renaissance, which experimented with disco and house music and paid homage to LGBTQ+ ball culture. She obtained her first solo number-one since 2008 with the album's lead single, "Break My Soul", with Renaissance being her first solo studio album since 2016.

She is one of the List of best-world's best-selling recording artists, having sold over 200 million records worldwide.<ref></ref>

 Life and career 
 1981–1996: Early life and career beginnings 
Beyonce Giselle Knowles</ref><ref>Mathew is African American; Tina is Louisiana Creole:
* 
* 
* </ref>

Beyoncé's maternal grandparents, Lumas Beyince, and Agnez Dereon (daughter of Odilia Broussard and Eugene DeRouen),<ref name="KreolMag"></ref> She is also a descendant of Acadian militia officer Joseph Broussard, who was exiled to French Louisiana after the expulsion of the Acadians.<ref name=smol1 /> Her fourth great-grandmother, Marie-Françoise Trahan, was born in 1774 in Bangor,Bangor, located on Belle Île, France. Trahan was a daughter of Acadians who had taken refuge on Belle Île after the Acadian expulsion. The Estates of Brittany had divided the lands of Belle Île to distribute them among 78 other Acadian families and the already settled inhabitants. The Trahan family lived on Belle Île for over ten years before immigrating to Louisiana, where she married a Broussard descendant.<ref>Beyoncé has roots in Brittany:
* 
* 
* </ref>

Beyoncé was raised Catholic and attended St. Mary's Montessori School in Houston, where she enrolled in dance classes.<ref></ref>

When Beyoncé was eight, she met LaTavia Roberson at an audition for an all-girl entertainment group.<ref name="Kaufman"></ref> Mathew cut the original line-up to four and the group continued performing as an opening act for other established R&B girl groups.<ref name="Kaufman" /> The girls auditioned before record labels and were finally signed to Elektra Records, moving to Atlanta Records briefly to work on their first recording, only to be cut by the company.<ref name="FOX" /> This put further strain on the family, and Beyoncé's parents separated. On October 5, 1995, Dwayne Wiggins's Grass Roots Entertainment signed the group. In 1996, the girls began recording their debut album under an agreement with Sony Music, the Knowles family reunited, and shortly after, the group got a contract with Columbia Records with the assistance of Columbia talent scout Teresa LaBarbera Whites.<ref name="Biography Today" />

 1997–2002: Destiny's Child 



The group changed their name to Destiny's Child in 1996, based upon a passage in the Book of Isaiah.<ref></ref>

LeToya Luckett and Roberson became unhappy with Mathew's managing of the band and eventually were replaced by Farrah Franklin and Michelle Williams.<ref name="Kaufman" /> Beyoncé experienced depression following the split with Luckett and Roberson after being publicly blamed by the media, critics, and blogs for its cause.<ref></ref>

The remaining band members recorded "Independent Women Part I", which appeared on the soundtrack to the 2000 film Charlie'Charlie's Angels. It became their best-charting single, topping the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 chart for eleven consecutive weeks.<ref name="Kaufman" /> In early 2001, while Destiny's Child was completing their third album, Beyoncé landed a major role in the MTV made-for-television film, Carmen: A Hip Hopera, starring alongside American actor Mekhi Phifer. Set in Philadelphia, the film is a modern interpretation of the 19th-century opera Carmen by French composer Georges Bizet.<ref name="carmen"></ref> After releasing their holiday album 8 Days of Christmas in October 2001, the group announced a hiatus to further pursue solo careers.<ref name="Kaufman" />

In July 2002, Beyoncé made her theatrical film debut, playing Foxxy Cleopatra alongside Mike Myers in the comedy film Austin Powers in Goldmember,<ref></ref>

 2003–2005: Dangerously in Love and Destiny Fulfilled 

Beyoncé's first solo recording was a feature on Jay-Z's song </ref>

In November 2003, she embarked on the Dangerously in Love Tour in Europe and later toured alongside Missy Elliott and Alicia Keys for the Verizon Ladies First Tour in North America.<ref></ref>

 2006–2007: B'Day and Dreamgirls 
Beyoncé's second solo album B'B'Day was released on September 4, 2006, in the US, to coincide with her twenty-fifth birthday.<ref></ref>

At the 49th Annual Grammy Awards (2007), B'Day was nominated for five Grammy Awards, including Grammy Award for Best Contemporary R&Best Contemporary R&B Album, Grammy Award for Best Female R&Best Female R&B Vocal Performance for "Ring the Alarm" and Grammy Award for Best R&Best R&B Song and Grammy Award for Best Rap/Best Rap/Sung Collaboration"for "Déjà Vu"; the Freemasons club mix of "Déjà Vu" without the rap was put forward in the Grammy Award for Best Remixed Recording, Non-Best Remixed Recording, Non-Classical category. B'Day won the award for Best Contemporary R&B Album.<ref name="49thGr"></ref>

Her first acting role of 2006 was in the comedy film The Pink Panther starring opposite Steve Martin,<ref></ref>

 2008–2010: I Am... Sasha Fierce 

I Am... Sasha Fierce was released on November 18, 2008, in the United States.<ref></ref>

Beyoncé further expanded her acting career, starring as blues singer Etta James in the 2008 musical biopic Cadillac Records. Her performance in the film received praise from critics,<ref name="masterson"></ref>

At the 52nd Annual Grammy Awards, Beyoncé received ten nominations, including Album of the Year for I Am... Sasha Fierce, Record of the Year for "Halo", and Song of the Year for "Single Ladies (Put a Ring on It)", among others.<ref></ref>

Beyoncé announced a hiatus from her music career in January 2010, heeding her mother's advice, "to live life, to be inspired by things again".<ref name="hiatus"></ref>

 2011–2013: 4 and Super Bowl XLVII halftime show 


On June 26, 2011, she became the first solo female artist to headline the main Pyramid stage at the 2011 Glastonbury Festival in over twenty years.<ref></ref> The fourth single "Love on Top" spent seven consecutive weeks at number one on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart, while peaking at number 20 on the Billboard Hot 100, the highest peak from the album.<ref>"Love on Top":
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </ref>

In June 2012, she Revel Presents:performed for four nights at Revel Atlantic City's Ovation Hall to celebrate the resort's opening, her first performances since giving birth to her daughter.<ref></ref>

In January 2013, Destiny's Child released Love Songs (Destiny'Love Songs, a compilation album of the romance-themed songs from their previous albums and a newly recorded track, "Nuclear".<ref></ref>

 2013–2015: Beyoncé 

Beyoncé embarked on The Mrs. Carter Show World Tour on April 15 in Belgrade, Serbia; the tour included 132 dates that ran through to March 2014. It became the most successful tour of her career and one of the most successful tours of all time.<ref></ref>

On December 13, 2013, Beyoncé unexpectedly released her eponymous fifth studio album on the iTunes Store without any prior announcement or promotion. The album debuted atop the Billboard 200 chart, giving Beyoncé her fifth consecutive number-one album in the US.<ref name=applePR></ref>

In April 2014, Beyoncé and Jay-Z officially announced their On the Run Tour (Beyoncé and Jay-On the Run Tour. It served as the couple's first co-headlining stadium tour together.<ref name="joint tour" /> On August 24, 2014, she received the Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award at the 2014 MTV Video Music Awards. Beyoncé also won home three competitive awards: Best Video with a Social Message and Best Cinematography for "Pretty Hurts", as well as best collaboration for "Drunk in Love".<ref></ref>

At the 57th Annual Grammy Awards in February 2015, Beyoncé was nominated for six awards, ultimately winning three: Grammy Award for Best R&Best R&B Performance and Grammy Award for Best R&Best R&B Song for "Drunk in Love", and Best Surround Sound Album for Beyoncé.<ref name=":1"></ref>

 2016–2018: Lemonade and Everything Is Love 

On February 6, 2016, Beyoncé released "Formation" and its accompanying music video exclusively on the music streaming platform Tidal; the song was made available to download for free.<ref></ref>

On April 16, 2016, Beyoncé released a teaser clip for a project called Lemonade. A one-hour Beyoncé:film which aired on HBO on April 23, a corresponding album with the same title was released on the same day exclusively on Tidal.<ref></ref>

Lemonade became her most critically acclaimed work to date, receiving universal acclaim according to Metacritic, a website collecting reviews from professional music critics.<ref></ref>

In January 2017, it was announced that Beyoncé would headline the Coachella Music and Arts Festival. This would make Beyoncé only the second female headliner of the festival since it was founded in 1999.<ref></ref>

In September 2017, Beyoncé collaborated with J Balvin and Willy William, to release a remix of the song "Mi Gente". Beyoncé donated all proceeds from the song to hurricane charities for those affected by Hurricane Harvey and Hurricane Irma in Texas, Mexico, Puerto Rico, and other Caribbean Islands.<ref></ref>

On January 4, 2018, the music video of Beyoncé and Jay-Z's 4:4:44 collaboration, "Family Feud" was released.<ref></ref>

On April 14, 2018, Beyoncé played the first of two weekends as the headlining act of the Coachella Music Festival. Her performance of April 14, attended by 125,000 festival-goers, was immediately praised, with multiple media outlets describing it as historic. The performance became the most-tweeted-about performance of weekend one, as well as the most-watched live Coachella performance and the most-watched live performance on YouTube of all time. The show paid tribute to black culture, specifically historically black colleges and universities and featured a live band with over 100 dancers. Destiny's Child also reunited during the show.<ref></ref>

On June 6, 2018, Beyoncé and husband Jay-Z kicked-off the On the Run II Tour in Cardiff, United Kingdom. Ten days later, at their final London performance, the pair unveiled Everything Is Love, their joint studio album, credited under the name The Carters, and initially available exclusively on Tidal. The pair also released the video for the album's lead single, "Apeshit", on Beyoncé's official YouTube channel.<ref></ref>

 2019–2021: Homecoming, The Lion King and Black Is King 
Image:Beyoncé Black Is King Still.Beyoncé in Black Is King
Homecoming, a documentary and concert film focusing on Beyoncé's historic 2018 Coachella performances, was released by Netflix on April 17, 2019.<ref></ref>

Beyoncé starred as the voice of Nala in the remake The Lion King, which was released on July 19, 2019.<ref></ref> Beyoncé called The Lion King: The Gift a "sonic cinema". She also stated that the album is influenced by everything from&nbsp;R&B,&nbsp;pop,&nbsp;hip hop&nbsp;and&nbsp;Afro Beat.<ref name="TheGift" /> The songs were additionally produced by African producers, which Beyoncé said was because "authenticity and heart were important to [her]", since the film is set in Africa.<ref name="TheGift" /> In September of the same year, a documentary chronicling the development, production and early music video filming of The Lion King: The Gift entitled "Beyoncé Presents: Making The Gift" was aired on ABC.

On April 29, 2020, Beyoncé was featured on the remix of Megan Thee Stallion's song "Savage", marking her first material of music for the year.<ref name="RapUpRemix"></ref>

Beyoncé wrote and recorded a song titled "Be Alive" for the biographical drama film King Richard.<ref></ref>

 2022–present: Renaissance 
On June 9, 2022, Beyoncé removed her profile pictures across various social media platforms causing speculation that she would be releasing new music.<ref></ref> 

Upon release, Renaissance received universal acclaim from critics.<ref></ref> 

The song Heated, which was co-written with Canadian rapper Drake, originally included the lyrics Spazzin’ on that a-- / spazz on that a--". Critics, including a number of disability charities and activists, argued that the word "spaz" represented a derogatory term for spastic diplegia, a form of cerebral palsy. In response, in August 2022, a representative for Beyoncé issued a statement and explained that “The word, not used intentionally in a harmful way, will be replaced”.<ref></ref>

On January 21, 2023, Beyoncé performed in a Dubai at a private show.<ref></ref>

 Artistry 
 Voice and musical style 
{{quote box
quote = With "Single Ladies", clearly I'd just gotten married, and people want to get married every day&nbsp;– then there was the whole Justin Timberlake thing [recreating the video] on Saturday Night Live, and it was also the year YouTube blew up. With "Irreplaceable", the aggressive lyrics, the acoustic guitar, and the 808 drum machine&nbsp;– those things don't typically go together, and it sounded fresh. "Crazy in Love" was another one of those classic moments in pop culture that none of us expected. I asked Jay to get on the song the night before I had to turn my album in – thank God he did. It still never gets old, no matter how many times I sing it.|source= —Beyoncé<ref name="billboard q&a"></ref>
align = right
width = 50%
border = 1px
fontsize = 90%
}}

Beyoncé's voice type is classified as Mezzo-Coloratura mezzo-soprano.<ref></ref>

Beyoncé's music is generally Contemporary R&R&B,<ref name="AllMusic12"></ref>

 Songwriting 
Beyoncé has received co-writing credits for most of her songs.<ref name="Fallon"></ref>

Beyoncé's songwriting process is also notorious for combining parts of different tracks, resulting in alteration of song structures. Sia, who co-wrote "Pretty Hurts", called Beyoncé "very Frankenstein when she comes to songs";<ref></ref>

In 2001, she became the first Black woman and second female lyricist to win the Pop Songwriter of the Year award at the American Society of Composers, Authors,ASCAP Pop Music Awards.<ref name="FOX" /><ref name="CBS"></ref>

 Influences 
{{multiple image
| total_width = 290
| align  = right
| image1 = Michael Jackson Dangerous World Tour 1993.jpg
| image2 = Tina turner 21021985 01 350.jpg
| footer = Beyoncé's major influences include Michael Jackson (left) and Tina Turner (right).
}}
Beyoncé names Michael Jackson as her major musical influence.<ref></ref> Anita Baker, and Toni Braxton.<ref name="Beyonce's Inspirations" />

The feminism and female empowerment themes on Beyoncé's second solo album B'Day were inspired by her role in Dreamgirls<ref></ref> Her fourth solo album, 4, was inspired by Fela Kuti, Contemporary R&1990s R&B, Earth, Wind & Fire, DeBarge, Lionel Richie, Teena Marie, The Jackson 5, New Edition, Adele, Florence and the Machine, and Prince.<ref name="billboard q&a" />

Beyoncé has stated that she is personally inspired by Michelle Obama (the 44th First Lady of the United States), saying "she proves you can do it all",<ref></ref>

 Music videos and stage 


In 2006, Beyoncé introduced her all-female tour band Suga Mama (also the name of a song on B'Day) which includes bassists, drummers, guitarists, horn players, keyboardists and percussionists.<ref></ref> Her background singers, The Mamas, consist of Montina Cooper-Donnell, Crystal Collins and Tiffany Moniqué Riddick. They made their debut appearance at the 2006 BET Awards and re-appeared in the music videos for "Irreplaceable" and "Green Light".<ref name="Vineyard1" /> The band have supported Beyoncé in most subsequent live performances, including her 2007 concert tour The Beyoncé Experience, I Am... World Tour (2009–2010), The Mrs. Carter Show World Tour (2013–2014) and The Formation World Tour (2016).

Beyoncé has received praise for her stage presence and voice during live performances. Jarett Wieselman of the New York Post placed her at number one on her list of the Five Best Singer/Dancers.<ref></ref>

Beyoncé has worked with numerous directors for her music videos throughout her career, including Melina Matsoukas, Jonas Åkerlund, and Jake Nava. Bill Condon, director of Beauty and the Beast, stated that the Lemonade visuals in particular served as inspiration for his film, commenting, "You look at Beyoncé's brilliant movie Lemonade, this genre is taking on so many different forms&nbsp;... I do think that this very old-school break-out-into-song traditional musical is something that people understand again and really want."<ref></ref>

 Alter ego 
Described as being "sexy, seductive and provocative" when performing on stage, Beyoncé has said that she originally created the alter ego "Sasha Fierce" to keep that stage persona separate from who she really is. She described Sasha as being "too aggressive, too strong, too sassy [and] too sexy", stating, "I'm not like her in real life at all."<ref name="Depression" /> Sasha was conceived during the making of "Crazy in Love", and Beyoncé introduced her with the release of her 2008 album, I Am... Sasha Fierce. In February 2010, she announced in an interview with Allure magazine that she was comfortable enough with herself to no longer need Sasha Fierce.<ref></ref>

 Public image 

Beyoncé has been described as having a wide-ranging sex appeal, with music journalist Touré writing that since the release of Dangerously in Love, she has "become a crossover sex symbol".<ref></ref>

In September 2010, Beyoncé made her runway modelling debut at Tom Ford's Spring/Summer 2011 fashion show.<ref></ref>

According to Italian fashion designer Roberto Cavalli, Beyoncé uses different fashion styles to work with her music while performing.<ref></ref>

Beyoncé has been named "Queen Bey" from publications over the years. The term is a reference to the common phrase "queen bee", a term used for the leader of a group of females. The nickname also refers to the queen of a beehive, with her fan base being named "The BeyHive". The BeyHive was previously titled "The Beyontourage", (a portmanteau of Beyoncé and entourage), but was changed after online petitions on Twitter and online news reports during competitions.<ref></ref>

In 2006, the animal rights organization People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA), criticized Beyoncé for wearing and using fur in her clothing line House of Deréon.<ref name="PETA"></ref>

Beyoncé's lighter skin color and costuming has drawn criticism from some in the African-American community.<ref name="Jones" /> Emmett Price, a professor of music at Northeastern University, wrote in 2007 that he thinks race plays a role in many of these criticisms, saying white celebrities who dress similarly do not attract as many comments.<ref name="Jones"></ref>

Beyoncé has been a vocal advocate for the Black Lives Matter movement. The release of "Formation" on February 6, 2016, saw her celebrate her heritage, with the song's music video featuring pro-black imagery and most notably a shot of wall graffiti that says "Stop shooting us". The day after the song's release she performed it at the 2016 Super Bowl halftime show with back up dancers dressed to represent the Black Panther Party. This incited criticism from politicians and police officers, with some police boycotting Beyoncé's then upcoming Formation World Tour.<ref></ref>

 Personal life 
 Marriage and children 

Beyoncé started a relationship with Jay-Z after their collaboration on </ref>

Beyoncé miscarried around 2010 or 2011, describing it as "the saddest thing" she had ever endured.<ref></ref>

Following the release of Lemonade, which included the single "Sorry", in 2016, speculations arose about Jay-Z's alleged infidelity with a mistress referred to as "Becky". Jon Pareles in The New York Times pointed out that many of the accusations were "aimed specifically and recognizably" at him.<ref name="pareles"></ref>

On February 1, 2017, she revealed on her Instagram account that she was expecting twins. Her announcement gained over 6.3&nbsp;million likes within eight hours, breaking the world record for the most liked image on the website at the time.<ref></ref>

 Activism 
Beyoncé performed "America the Beautiful" at President Barack Obama's 2009 presidential inauguration, as well as "At Last" during the first inaugural dance at the Neighborhood Ball two days later.<ref></ref> She performed the American national anthem "The Star-Spangled Banner" at his second inauguration in January 2013.<ref name="secondinauguration" />

The Washington Post reported in May 2015, that Beyoncé attended a major celebrity fundraiser for 2016 presidential nominee Hillary Clinton.<ref></ref>



In 2013, Beyoncé stated in an interview in Vogue that she considered herself to be "a Fourth-modern-day feminist".<ref></ref> She says to understand what being a feminist is, "it's very simple. It's someone who believes in equal rights for men and women."<ref name="independent.co.uk" /> She advocated to provide equal opportunities for young boys and girls, men and women must begin to understand the double standards that remain persistent in our societies and the issue must be illuminated in effort to start making changes.<ref name="independent.co.uk" />

She has also contributed to the Ban Bossy campaign, which uses TV and social media to encourage leadership in girls.<ref></ref>

In December 2012, Beyoncé along with a variety of other celebrities teamed up and produced a video campaign for "Demand A Plan", a bipartisan effort by a group of 950 U.S. mayors and others<ref></ref>

In February 2017, Beyoncé spoke out against the withdrawal of protections for transgender students in public schools by Donald Trump's presidential administration. Posting a link to the 100 Days of Kindness campaign on her Facebook page, Beyoncé voiced her support for transgender youth and joined a roster of celebrities who spoke out against Trump's decision.<ref></ref>

In November 2017, Beyoncé presented Colin Kaepernick with the 2017 Sports Illustrated Muhammad Ali Legacy Award, stating, "Thank you for your selfless heart and your conviction, thank you for your personal sacrifice", and that "Colin took action with no fear of consequence&nbsp;... To change perception, to change the way we treat each other, especially people of color. We're still waiting for the world to catch up." Muhammad Ali was heavily penalized in his career for protesting the status quo of US civil rights through opposition to the Vietnam War, by refusing to serve in the military. 40 years later, Kaepernick had already lost one professional year due to taking a much quieter and legal stand "for people that are oppressed".<ref>[https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/early-lead/wp/2017/12/06/beyonce-thanks-colin-kaepernick-for-his-personal-sacrifice-while-presenting-muhammad-ali-award/ Mullan, Dillon] "Beyoncé thanks Colin Kaepernick for his 'personal sacrifice' while presenting Muhammad Ali Award, The Washington Post, December 6, 2017. Retrieved September 13, 2018.</ref>

 Wealth 
Forbes magazine began reporting on Beyoncé's earnings in 2008, calculating that the $80&nbsp;million earned between June 2007 to June 2008, for her music, tour, films and clothing line made her the world's best-paid music personality at the time, above Madonna and Celine Dion.<ref></ref>
and ninth on the "Most Powerful Women in the World" list in 2010.<ref></ref>

MTV estimated that by the end of 2014, Beyoncé would become the highest-paid Black musician in history;<ref></ref>

 Legacy 



Beyoncé's success has led to her becoming a cultural icon and earning her the nickname "Queen Bey".<ref name="theguardian.com" /> Constance Grady wrote for Vox, "The transformation of Beyoncé from well-liked pop star to cultural icon came in three phases, punctuated by the self-titled Beyoncé album of 2013, 2016's Lemonade, and 2018's Homecoming concert at Coachella."<ref></ref>

Writing for Entertainment Weekly, Alex Suskind noticed how Beyoncé was the decade's (2010s) defining pop star, stating that "no one dominated music in the 2010s like Queen Bey", explaining that her "songs, album rollouts, stage presence, social justice initiatives, and disruptive public relations strategy have influenced the way we've viewed music since 2010."<ref name="EW"></ref>

Music critics have often credited Beyoncé with the invention of the staccato rap-singing style that has since dominated pop, R&B and rap music. Lakin Starling of The Fader wrote that Beyoncé's innovative implementation of the delivery style on Destiny's Child's 1999 album The Writing's on the Wall invented a new form of R&B.<ref></ref>

Beyoncé has been credited with reviving the album as an art form in an era dominated by singles and streaming. This started with her 2011 album 4; while mainstream R&B artists were forgoing albums-led R&B in favor of singles-led EDM, Beyoncé aimed to place the focus back on albums as an artform and re-establish R&B as a mainstream concern.<ref></ref>

She is known for coining popular phrases such as "put a ring on it", a euphemism for marriage proposal, "I woke up like this", which started a trend of posting morning selfies with the hashtag #iwokeuplikethis, and "boy, bye", which was used as part of the Democratic National Committee's campaign for the 2020 election.<ref></ref>

In January 2012, research scientist Bryan Lessard named Scaptia beyonceae, a species of horse-fly found in Northern Queensland, Australia after Beyoncé due to the fly's unique golden hairs on its abdomen.<ref></ref>

 Influence on other artists 
Various recording artists and celebrities have cited Beyoncé as their influence. Lady Gaga explained how Beyoncé gave her the determination to become a musician, recalling seeing her in a Destiny's Child music video and saying: "Oh, she's a star. I want that."<ref></ref>

 Achievements 

Beyoncé has received numerous awards, and is the most-awarded female artist of all time.<ref></ref> Having sold over 200&nbsp;million records worldwide (a further 60&nbsp;million additionally with Destiny's Child), Beyoncé is one of the List of best-best-selling music artists of all time.<ref>She is one of the best-selling artists of all time:
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </ref> In 2002, she received Songwriter of the Year from American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers becoming the First African American woman to win the award. In 2004 and 2019, she received NAACP Image Award for Entertainer of the Year and the Soul Train Music Award for Sammy Davis Jr. – Entertainer of the Year.

In 2005, she also received APEX Award at the Trumpet Award honoring achievements of Black African Americans. In 2007, Beyoncé received the International Artist of Excellence award by the American Music Awards. She also received Honorary Otto at the Bravo Otto. The following year, she received the Legend Award for Outstanding Contribution to the Arts at the World Music Awards and Career Achievement Award at the LOS40 Music Awards. In 2010, she received Award of Honor for Artist of the Decade at the NRJ Music Award and at the 2011 Billboard Music Awards, Beyoncé received the inaugural Billboard Millennium Award. Beyoncé received the Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award at the 2014 MTV Video Music Awards and was honored as Honorary Mother of the Year at the Australian Mother of the Year Award in Barnardo's Australia for her Humanitarian Effort in the region and the Council of Fashion Designers of America Fashion Icon Award in 2016.  In 2019, alongside Jay-Z, she received GLAAD Vanguard Award that is presented to a member of the entertainment community who does not identify as LGBT but who has made a significant difference in promoting equal rights for LGBT people. In 2020, she was awarded the BET Humanitarian Award. Consequence of Sound named her the 30th best singer of all time.<ref></ref>

Beyoncé has won 32 Grammy Awards, both as a solo artist and member of Destiny's Child and The Carters, making her the most honored singer, male or female, by the Grammys.<ref name="HonoredArtist"></ref>

Beyoncé has won 29 MTV Video Music Awards, making her the most-awarded artist in Video Music Award history. She won two awards each with The Carters and Destiny's Child making her lifetime total of 29 VMAs. "Single Ladies (Put a Ring on It)" and "Formation" won Video of the Year in 2009 and 2016 respectively. Beyoncé tied the record set by Lady Gaga in 2010 for the most VMAs won in one night for a female artist with eight in 2016.<ref name="VMAS Record" /> She is also the most-awarded and nominated artist in BET Award history, winning 29 awards from a total of 60 nominations,<ref></ref> the most-awarded person at the Soul Train Music Awards with 17 awards as a solo artist, and the most-awarded person at the NAACP Image Awards with 24 awards as a solo artist.

Additionally, Beyoncé is the most-awarded artist at the NAACP Image Awards with 22 awards,<ref></ref> and the Soul Train Music Awards with 21 awards.

Following her role in Dreamgirls, Beyoncé was nominated for Best Original Song for "Listen" and Golden Globe Award for Best Actress –Best Actress at the Golden Globe Awards,<ref></ref>

She was named on the 2016 BBC Radio 4 Woman's Hour Power List as one of seven women judged to have had the biggest impact on women's lives over the past 70 years, alongside Margaret Thatcher, Barbara Castle, Helen Brook, Germaine Greer, Jayaben Desai and Bridget Jones,<ref>[https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-38303886 "Margaret Thatcher tops Woman's Hour Power List"], BBC News (Arts & Entertainment), December 14, 2016.</ref> She was named the Most Powerful Woman in Music on the same list in 2020.<ref></ref>

On June 16, 2021, Beyoncé was among several celebrities at the Pollstar Awards where she won the award of "top touring artist" of the decade (2010s).<ref></ref>

 Business and ventures 
In 2010, Beyoncé founded her own entertainment company Parkwood Entertainment which formed as an imprint based from Columbia Records, the company began as a production unit for videos and films in 2008. Parkwood Entertainment is named after a street in Houston, Texas where Beyoncé once lived.<ref name="Music World Ent"></ref> The company has also distributed Beyoncé's albums such as her self-titled fifth studio album (2013), Lemonade (2016) and The Carters, Everything is Love (2018). Beyoncé has also signed other artists to Parkwood such as Chloe x Halle, who performed at Super Bowl LIII in February 2019.

 Endorsements and partnerships 
Beyoncé has worked with Pepsi since 2002,<ref></ref>

Beyoncé has worked with Tommy Hilfiger for the fragrances True Star (singing a cover version of "Wishing on a Star")<ref></ref>

The release of a video-game Starpower: Beyoncé was cancelled after Beyoncé pulled out of a $100&nbsp;million with GateFive who alleged the cancellation meant the sacking of 70 staff and millions of pounds lost in development.<ref name="GateFive"></ref>

In March 2015, Beyoncé became a co-owner, with other artists, of the music streaming service Tidal. The service specializes in lossless audio and high definition music videos. Beyoncé's husband Jay-Z acquired the parent company of Tidal, Aspiro, in the first quarter of 2015.<ref></ref>

In November 2020, Beyoncé formed a multi-year partnership with exercise equipment and media company Peloton. The partnership was formed to celebrate homecoming season in historically black colleges and universities, providing themed workout experiences inspired by Beyoncé's 2019 Homecoming film and Homecoming:live album after 2020's homecoming celebrations were cancelled due to the COVID-19 pandemic. As part of the partnership, Beyoncé and Peloton are donating free memberships to all students at 10 HBCUs, and Peloton are pursuing long-term recruiting partnerships at the HCBUs. Gwen Bethel Riley, head of music at Peloton, said: "When we had conversations with Beyoncé around how critical a social impact component was to all of us, it crystallized how important it was to embrace Homecoming as an opportunity to celebrate and create dialogue around Black culture and music, in partnership with HBCUs."<ref></ref>

In 2021, Beyoncé and Jay-Z partnered with Tiffany & Co. for the company's "About Love" campaign. Beyoncé became the fourth woman, and first Black woman, to wear the Tiffany Yellow Diamond.<ref></ref>

 Fashion lines 
Beyoncé and her mother introduced House of Deréon, a contemporary women's fashion line, in 2005.<ref name="BusWire" /> The concept is inspired by three generations of women in their family, with the name paying tribute to Beyoncé's grandmother, Agnèz Deréon, a respected seamstress.<ref></ref> The collection features sportswear, denim offerings with fur, outerwear and accessories that include handbags and footwear, and are available at department and specialty stores across the U.S. and Canada.<ref name="BusWire" />

In 2005, Beyoncé teamed up with House of Brands, a shoe company, to produce a range of footwear for House of Deréon.<ref></ref>

In October 2014, Beyoncé signed a deal to launch an activewear line of clothing with British fashion retailer Topshop.<ref name="Time Alter"></ref>

 Philanthropy 

In 2002, Beyoncé, Kelly Rowland and Tina Knowles built the Knowles-Rowland Center for Youth, a community center in Downtown Houston. After Hurricane Katrina in 2005, Beyoncé and Rowland founded the Survivor Foundation to provide transitional housing to displaced families and provide means for new building construction, to which Beyoncé contributed an initial $250,000.<ref></ref>

After starring in Cadillac Records in 2009 and learning about Phoenix House, a non-profit drug and alcohol rehabilitation organization, Beyoncé donated her full $4&nbsp;million salary from the film to the organization. Beyoncé and her mother subsequently established the Beyoncé Cosmetology Center, which offers a seven-month cosmetology training course helping Phoenix House's clients gain career skills during their recovery.<ref></ref>

In January 2010, Beyoncé participated in George Clooney and Wyclef Jean's Hope for Haiti Now: A Global Benefit for Earthquake Relief telethon,<ref></ref>

Beyoncé became an ambassador for the 2012 World Humanitarian Day campaign donating her song "I Was Here" and its music video, shot in the UN, to the campaign.<ref name="WHD2012"></ref>

Beyoncé and Jay-Z secretly donated tens of thousands of dollars to bail out Black Lives Matter protesters in Baltimore and Ferguson, as well as funded infrastructure for the establishment of Black Lives Matter chapters across the US.<ref></ref>

During Hurricane Harvey in August 2017, Beyoncé launched BeyGOOD Houston to support those affected by the hurricane in Houston. The organization donated necessities such as cots, blankets, pillows, baby products, feminine products and wheelchairs, and funded long-term revitalization projects.<ref></ref>

In April 2020, Beyoncé donated $6&nbsp;million to the National Alliance in Mental Health, University of California,UCLA and local community-based organizations in order to provide mental health and personal wellness services to essential workers during the COVID-19 pandemic. BeyGOOD also teamed up with local organizations to help provide resources to communities of color, including food, water, cleaning supplies, medicines and face masks.<ref></ref>

 Discography 



Studio albums
* Dangerously in Love (2003)
* B'B'Day (2006)
* I Am... Sasha Fierce (2008)
* 4 (2011)
* Beyoncé (2013)
* Lemonade (2016)
* Renaissance (2022)

with Destiny's Child

* Destiny'Destiny's Child (1998)
* The Writing's on the Wall (1999)
* Survivor (Destiny'Survivor (2001)
* 8 Days of Christmas (2001)
* Destiny Fulfilled (2004)

with Jay-Z (as The Carters)

* Everything Is Love (2018)


 Filmography 





Films starred
* Carmen: A Hip Hopera (2001)
* Austin Powers in Goldmember (2002)
* The Fighting Temptations (2003)
* Fade to Black (2004)
* The Pink Panther (2006)
* Dreamgirls (2006)
* Cadillac Records (2008)
* Obsessed (2009)
* Epic (2013)
* The Lion King (2019)

Films directed
* Life Is But a Dream (2013)
* Beyoncé: Lemonade (2016)
* Homecoming (2019)
* Black Is King (2020)


 Tours and residencies 



Headlining tours
* Dangerously in Love Tour (2003)
* The Beyoncé Experience (2007)
* I Am... World Tour (2009–2010)
* The Mrs. Carter Show World Tour (2013–2014)
* The Formation World Tour (2016)
* Renaissance World Tour (2023)<ref></ref>
Co-headlining tours
* Verizon Ladies First Tour (with Alicia Keys and Missy Elliott) (2004)
* On the Run Tour (Beyoncé and Jay-On the Run Tour (with Jay-Z) (2014)
* On the Run II Tour (with Jay-Z) (2018)

Residencies
* I Am... Yours (2009)
* 4 Intimate Nights with Beyoncé (2011)
* Revel Presents: Beyoncé Live (2012)


 See also 
* Forbes list of highest-Forbes list of highest-earning musicians
* Honorific nicknames in popular music
* List of artists who reached number one in the United States
* European Hot 100 Singles#Most number-List of artists with the most number-one European singles
* List of Billboard Social 50 number-List of Billboard Social 50 number-one artists
* List of black Golden Globe Award winners and nominees
* List of highest-grossing live music artists
* List of best-selling female music artists
* List of most-followed Instagram accounts


 Notes 



 References 


 External links 

* 
* 
* 
* 



{{Navboxes
|title=Related articles
|list1


{{Navboxes
|title = Awards for Beyoncé
|list 

































}}



}}


















































































